Hi and welcome to this week's Stella
developer meeting with me in the studio
here. Today I have Fernando from dop
protocol and I can't exactly remember
when I heard about dop protocol for the
first time but I do remember I noticed
that my feeds in all social media like
LinkedIn X anywhere this company just
started to pop up and there was articles
and they were going to conferences and I
just just got really curious about
what's up with these guys what are they
doing so and and of course they were
attacking Stellar in everything they
were doing being awesome ambassadors. So
I started to to read a little bit up on
what they're doing and since then I've
had the pleasure of meeting the the
whole team several times  last last
whole team several times last last
time actually this week  in Silicon
time actually this week in Silicon
Valley where I met Oscar but  met the
Valley where I met Oscar but met the
team also at Meridian  many other
team also at Meridian many other
places. So I think it's a great
opportunity to have them here in the
studio and and hear what they're up to,
what they're doing and and share with
the rest of the community. So welcome
Fernando and thank you for joining
today.
>> Yeah, thank you for the invitation Ken.
I'm pleasure to be here.  so should I
I'm pleasure to be here. so should I
just now continue with the presentation?
>> Yeah, maybe maybe just just tell a
>> Yeah, maybe maybe just just tell a
little bit about  who you are, how
little bit about who you are, how
long how long time you've been working
on protocol.
>> A bit of an introduction. I'm
>> A bit of an introduction. I'm
Fernando Castillo. I'm currently the CTO
of DOP protocol, one of the co-founders
and
our main goal  now with the protocol
our main goal now with the protocol
is to
be able to all of the infrastructure
that's not being funded  to get funded
that's not being funded to get funded
by decentralized means. And  now in
by decentralized means. And now in
this presentation
hopefully I'm going to show a way on
how we can do that with  doken studio
how we can do that with doken studio
and with the other tools we've been
developing.
So  first  yeah what's the team a
So first yeah what's the team a
bit of also an introduction
car and already mentioned Oscar he's
our CEO he's currently at  Silicon
our CEO he's currently at Silicon
Valley  doing the embark pro program
Valley doing the embark pro program
with Deron University in conjunction
with Stellar
also we have Simone Spinola who's our
operation and business  officer and
operation and business officer and
myself as I said already and also as a
side note I'm finishing my PhD until
Berlin now I'm in Germany currently so
it's a bit  late for me now it's 10
it's a bit late for me now it's 10
p.m. But I'm happy to be here and
yeah so what's the the problem that we
are facing is that in Latin America
there are a lot of infrastructure
operators that are lacking fund and they
struggle to to scale because on
traditional banking systems the they
require to go to to ask to the bank to
then request for a loan then go through
all the bureaucracy of the bank.  but
all the bureaucracy of the bank. but
then also time moves and they need
the the money to deploy and to  create
the the money to deploy and to create
this new infrastructure that is not
risky by itself but maybe the banks
consider is risky because of the type of
size of the company maybe or the type of
emerging market. So it's but it's not
that the business business itself of
that infrastructure is  non
that infrastructure is non
investable or that it will give money
returns.
So as I was saying  let's imagine that
So as I was saying let's imagine that
you are Mariano you are trying to get a
traditional credit a loan for for a
bank.  but this  depending on the
bank. but this depending on the
country also for example we've recently
seen in Argentina how this  country
seen in Argentina how this country
was facing high inflation rates or
similar situation with Venezuela
and other countries in Latin America
with high inflation rates that then
this ties those loans to higher interest
rates plus the the risk on the country
itself.
so  there's this problem of banks
so there's this problem of banks
because of these situations not
giving beneficial loans to
to these infrastructure operators and
at the same time  if the
at the same time if the
infrastructure operator would  go for
infrastructure operator would go for
example for a crowdfunding or a regular
crowdfunding  solution where they
crowdfunding solution where they
could go online and then they could say
okay  let's get all of these people
okay let's get all of these people
request this this  this amount of
request this this this amount of
money. I don't know, let's ask for $100
,000
so we can build this power grid  based
so we can build this power grid based
on on solar  power. Then how then this
on on solar power. Then how then this
operator could  return or distribute
operator could return or distribute
the revenue that this energy production
is generating?
and how could they do it in a trust
trustworthy fashion. So all of the
all of the people that were investing or
supporting the project
can can give the the the money back
or the the investment. And just as a
parenthesis  latam infra operators are
parenthesis latam infra operators are
Latin American infrastructure operators.
They are for example  medium to small
They are for example medium to small
companies
that have this infrastructure
projects. For example, a small or not so
small but maybe a few kilowatts
or 100 kilowatts of   power into
or 100 kilowatts of power into
injecting into the energy grid. for
example, a solar base or holic
or there could be other type of
infrastructure for example  a data
infrastructure for example a data
center or any type of infrastructure
that's not  relying on a on a big
that's not relying on a on a big
company because big companies
they wouldn't have this type of
problem to to access  credits or loans
problem to to access credits or loans
from banks.
so in our or what are we proposing as
a solution we have this separated in in
four steps. One is to provide  a tool
four steps. One is to provide a tool
for the operator
to hand  out verifiable data from
to hand out verifiable data from
their existing
company or projects. So they can for
example  validate okay this  solar
example validate okay this solar
solar cell is going to produce  this
solar cell is going to produce this
amount of energy because it has this
specifications.
I can I have already bought them for
this price or I have this  revenue
this price or I have this revenue
evidence for similar
infrastructure
pictures or proof of location for
example for where is it installed the
the infrastructure
and that that's the first part of okay
how can we give some some
due diligence for example that's the
same thing that the bank would go when
when this person goes to the bank. Okay,
show me the papers. How can I I know
that you are not going to ask for the
money for an an madeup project, but
it's a real project and you're a real
company that was not just created
yesterday.
Then  all of this information is
Then all of this information is
naturally  audited and revised  by
naturally audited and revised by
by automated process that are human le.
what does that mean?  it means that
what does that mean? it means that
we check for example okay this is a
receipt  but it has a digital
receipt but it has a digital
signature. So it's not that  this
signature. So it's not that this
invoice for example you get from from
another company paying for your service
or for your infrastructure
is  is making this up but at least
is is making this up but at least
it's on on the record it's on the ledger
of the tax offices for example or or the
corresponding
regulatory
office in charge of of invoice
and then  so they they cannot  be
and then so they they cannot be
made up and the same with the with the
revenues or how other distribution
processes have been made.
And then  so and and the and the third
And then so and and the and the third
part is okay how can we then  get this
part is okay how can we then get this
decentralized  funding into the hands
decentralized funding into the hands
of Mariano the one that was asking for
the funding. So for this is where we
have the smart contracts that take care
of this  operation where the
of this operation where the
supporters for the project can support
Mariano's infrastructure project and
then he can gets the fund  to install
then he can gets the fund to install
or do the setup for their for their
project. Then  the same once
project. Then the same once
Mariano needs or is going to pay back
with the corresponding interest to their
supporters
then the smart contract also takes care
of that with a decentralized
distribution that's transparent and it's
auditable for all of the stakeholders.
And this is  currently on on a suite
And this is currently on on a suite
that we're calling DO token studio.
There
basically we have two two types of
users.  now we're thinking of a third
users. now we're thinking of a third
user but the two main users of you
probably have noticed already are the
infrastructure operator and the
investor or supporter. on one side the
infrastructure operator as I was saying
takes care of uploading the information
the device  information how  this is
the device information how this is
technically behaving how is the type of
revenue it's going to generate is
it's going to generate distributions or
revenue distributions
every month every week or every
quarter or annually. And those are the
those sets  the expected  APR
those sets the expected APR
that the  infrastructure operator is
that the infrastructure operator is
offering.  once this is done then
offering. once this is done then
this goes into the blockchain. So it's
it's committed that okay this is the
information we're committed for the
posterior auditing and then as I said
this is reviewed  the authenticity and
this is reviewed the authenticity and
the validity of the information
>> maybe maybe you can just have a moment
there's there's a couple of questions
>>
yes  so  yes actually well going for
yes so yes actually well going for
the first question what are latam in
front of operator Latin operators are
Latin American infrastructure operators.
They are the ones that that want to get
funded.
RWS and infra are inherently illquid.
How do you address that? Yes.  that's
How do you address that? Yes. that's
one of the innovation that we are we are
doing is that we are not  tokenizing
doing is that we are not tokenizing
maybe that was one point that I was
missing is that we are not tokenizing
the infrastructure by itself but what we
are focusing is on the revenue this
infrastructure is going to to generate
and that comes with a higher risk
obviously but then  it balances is the
obviously but then it balances is the
higher risk with the with a higher APR.
how do you solve regulatory
compliance low issues?  yes, this is
compliance low issues? yes, this is
I I I I really don't think I will be
able to address all of those
regulatory compliance issues, but I can
say that because of the of the nature of
the project that as I was saying earlier
we are not tokenizing an asset and it
itself but we are working with the
future revenue it will produce that can
solve
other type of  compliance around
other type of compliance around
regulation issues but also it's
important to mention that  this is
important to mention that this is
very  local and depending on on on
very local and depending on on on
each country finally so  it will it
each country finally so it will it
won't be the same for example the same
in the US and  here in Germany or in
in the US and here in Germany or in
Chile
okay then wait pay is this a loan or
is it a revenue participating in the
project
Yes. So this can be considered  as
Yes. So this can be considered as
m multiple things. So in the end  is
m multiple things. So in the end is
the this  revenue for the what the
the this revenue for the what the
infrastructure generates that's as I was
saying is what's  being kind of
saying is what's being kind of
tokenized.
so but then if you look at from a
different perspective then or the
traditional perspective this could be
taken as alone from the chat file.  I
taken as alone from the chat file. I
I see Oscar was as
now
is there I don't know is who review
central yes I think that's  those are
central yes I think that's those are
most of the questions then  yes this
most of the questions then yes this
is  obviously this is  a a regulated
is obviously this is a a regulated
service it cannot is  not the the
service it cannot is not the the
wild west But  now I I will focus
wild west But now I I will focus
mostly on the technological part of how
we are addressing these issues because
for compliance I think we we can take a
bit longer to answer all of those
questions.
Okay. So  I'll continue then.  so
Okay. So I'll continue then. so
with this we are  offering  multiple
with this we are offering multiple
features
in this platform that  this we can
in this platform that this we can
submit multiple type of evidence.
this is  based on on the concept of
this is based on on the concept of
trusts where we are producing evidence
for all of the stages  and all of the
for all of the stages and all of the
interaction the infrastructure and the
operators are generating and producing.
What does that mean? For example,
when the operator  the first one I
when the operator the first one I
I mentioned it already, the operator can
submit, okay, these are the technical
specifications or this is  an invoice.
specifications or this is an invoice.
but then we can get more complex
evidence when we start to aggregate
different types of evidence because
one in invoice alone for alone for
example  would mean okay you you will
example would mean okay you you will
you will receive this payment in the
future or you are receiving it now but
then to do the accounting  evidence
then to do the accounting evidence
for example for that we need to connect
with the ERP of the of the business and
that's  more complex than just
that's more complex than just
verifying a a single invoice. Then
humanoled guided integrity check
means that even though this
project  or what we are doing is
project or what we are doing is
highly  depending on automatization
highly depending on automatization
automat automation
we still require  people in the
we still require people in the
loop. personally looked at  so
loop. personally looked at so
everything goes  yes as as I was
everything goes yes as as I was
mentioning earlier on the the accord
regulation then  will rely on the
regulation then will rely on the
onchain verification module so all of
the transactions especially for the the
the stakeholders that are supporting the
project or the infrastructure operator
they can see how all of these actions
are  being verified and chained how
are being verified and chained how
they are transparent with the respective
proofs.
And finally
as  every project is different
as every project is different
all of them will have a different type
of scorings for for and with this will
represent basically from high risk
project to  and higher APR and
project to and higher APR and
lower risk and lower therefore APR
and in practical terms how is this
the overview of this  this  smart
the overview of this this smart
contracts in particular for the token
studio is that  we as  the the or
studio is that we as the the or
the infrastructure operator deploys the
the splitter contract
and there we have  different functions
and there we have different functions
to define the shareholders
how are they going to be allocated,
how are they going to  do the
how are they going to do the
withdrawals  every  how how often
withdrawals every how how often
are going to be the distribution events
and  to which token is this  binded
and to which token is this binded
regularly we will be working with
USDC
but for example this could take other
type of tokens if  that's how that
type of tokens if that's how that
project is defined but  most of most
project is defined but most of most
of the time  we work with  USDC
of the time we work with USDC
and in in simple terms  it's  super
and in in simple terms it's super
s I think it's super easy to
understand if there's one  chair
understand if there's one chair
holder or token holder  with the 10%
holder or token holder with the 10%
then  once the distribution take place
then once the distribution take place
all of the
all of the revenue that was generated
and was  deposited in into the smart
and was deposited in into the smart
contract  then it will go a 10% into
contract then it will go a 10% into
the the one that has a 10% of of the
tokens.
So on how this  distribution flow goes
So on how this distribution flow goes
is that  first
is that first
we have the admin that communicates
to the distri to the splitter contract
that's going to do the distribution
what's the token address then this is
verified inside of the smart contract
then it verifies
then check the current balance for
example are those  Are there 100
example are those Are there 100
tokens to to distribute and then in each
case it's  the loop  checking on the
case it's the loop checking on the
token holders
and  the respective balance and and
and the respective balance and and
there that's how it does the calculation
and this goes then into the storage
class where where  finish where it's
class where where finish where it's
finished  with the distribution. It's
finished with the distribution. It's
really straightforward.
Then for the withdraw then the each
shareholder or token holder goes into
the the splitter
it does the prospective verification
check with the storage what's the
current allocation then decrease on the
storage part then
communicates directly with the token
the token does a transfer with a good
successful withdraw
And  then it goes again to the to the
And then it goes again to the to the
throold
and  at the storage level this is just
and at the storage level this is just
just in case  I'm presenting it this
just in case I'm presenting it this
like this because  we are currently
like this because we are currently
going under the respective revisions and
auditings.  so it's it cannot be
auditings. so it's it cannot be
everything public.  I mean this can
everything public. I mean this can
but  not the code itself yet.
but not the code itself yet.
And then  we have the the cher data
And then we have the the cher data
key, the config data key and the
allocation data key which basically
defines
how is the
how is the charge for each data holder,
who's the admin, all of the security,
what's the allocation for each  token
what's the allocation for each token
holder and and then how this can be
allocated each time the distribution
goes.
Then here
on the security level on how we are
defining we are taking this very
seriously  defining  the access
seriously defining the access
control policies admin only function the
authentication the lock on contract the
transfer contracts
also we have  our internal scripts
also we have our internal scripts
for doing the a to have a deployer and
do an anatomical
operations. So we don't run on front run
is front front running
then we have allocation limits some
validations
and and so on.
and this  as a first case we've
and this as a first case we've
presented this to investment of returns
for the for the the investors or
supporters of of the project of
infrastructure. But this for example
could be used as  token vesting models
could be used as token vesting models
over team members on time for  similar
over team members on time for similar
to the revenue trading for a DAO
treasury or for reward distribution.
And then for the particular
the feature that were missing for
before are that this is a secure and
transparent way on how this
distribution
method is  performed because all of
method is performed because all of
the transactions are done on chain and
that these transactions are then
proportional to each one of the
supporters.
So yes, thank you very much.  I I hope
So yes, thank you very much. I I hope
I didn't pass on time and
>> we we have we have a few questions.
>> in in the chat I think.
>> okay.
>> I think the
answer
>> yes. So where I was I left is it
>> yes. So where I was I left is it
either alone with interest or is it at
your particip Yes. As I said, it's more
of a chair participation of the project.
I was making the the loan with interest
at the beginning to make the analogy
with  traditional banking settings.
with traditional banking settings.
who will review centralized entities?
yes. I mean this needs to go  all
yes. I mean this needs to go all
of all of the businesses and infrastruct
which are the infrastructure operators
in this case goes into a know your
business process because this has to
also go  with antimony laundering
also go with antimony laundering
policy and and all of those regulations.
does that mean that the entire review
process and due diligence is no the
proofs  or more than the proofs the
proofs or more than the proofs the
the hash of the proofs and the evidence
are stored unchanged because we cannot
just publish  yeah  accounting
just publish yeah accounting
states or financial states from
companies on chain.  is it really 100%
companies on chain. is it really 100%
of the project's revenue or is it some
Yes.  so when when we consider this
Yes. so when when we consider this
there's for the for example the the
energy production that a solar panel is
going to to generate
it's going let's say it generates 100
dollars  per week. Then  from
dollars per week. Then from
this  there's a minimal  amount
this there's a minimal amount
that's defined  during the creation of
that's defined during the creation of
the project that needs to go by  to
the project that needs to go by to
the operation itself.  that could be
the operation itself. that could be
for example  30% or 20% that
for example 30% or 20% that
depends on the on the project.
so it's finally on the
discounted from the operation then
that's what goes into the what's the
distributed how could you manage then
state expiration if you are storing
hashes on chain
do you mean like  if a proof is
do you mean like if a proof is
expired for example I I'm not
to which state do you mean?
world matias.
>> Yes. so
>> Yes. so
that is  so when proofs are verified
that is so when proofs are verified
it it depends on the type of pro proof
and there are multiple risk risk when
you verify proofs.  certainly one is
you verify proofs. certainly one is
for example using old proofs or
reusing proofs. Other is
just trying to use past evidence as
newly evidence. But all of those
parts  are very part of the ver that
parts are very part of the ver that
of the offchain verification. And when
the onchain verification happens
this proof is has been already
through this process.
yes. So currently the the guarantees
where
do I pass this? Ah  yeah let me answer
do I pass this? Ah yeah let me answer
this first.  yes. So there's currently
this first. yes. So there's currently
a new feature we want to to to do is
to actually put some collateral that can
give  stakeholders more guarantees.
give stakeholders more guarantees.
So ina so we would because from the
beginning this sounds more like okay we
will we could be giving random money to
a strangers stranger that maybe at that
point everything was true but then still
did a rock pole as as you mentioned and
and therefore we are  creating this
and therefore we are creating this
other collateralization mechanisms
but that's  not defined yet. But
but that's not defined yet. But
that's why also on the first stage of
this we are focusing only on companies
that  we know
that we know
that can give this guarantees and are
not a meme company for example. So
that's  one one really important
that's one one really important
point.
so stellar asset or so. So so
the tok the the
stellar
the artist this token actual stellar
asset or sorban tokens. So as we as I
was saying it's  the token that's
was saying it's the token that's
distributed is  a USDC
distributed is a USDC
and how the asset  of the token holder
and how the asset of the token holder
is also  a token because  why and
is also a token because why and
why not a regular seller asset because
we needed to create some extra functions
that were not  into the assets.
Okay, great. I think  I think you got
Okay, great. I think I think you got
caught up on all the questions. It's
great to see that there's so many
questions, so much interest in in what
you guys are doing and how you how you
how you structure it. So yeah, it was
great.  if there's no other questions,
great. if there's no other questions,
then  I guess we can we can stop here,
then I guess we can we can stop here,
but thank you so much for for joining
today. I think it's super interesting to
see what you're doing. It's  I I kind
see what you're doing. It's I I kind
of  I kind of like these   type of
of I kind of like these type of
projects that are not  not the typical
projects that are not not the typical
projects we see.  it's definitely
projects we see. it's definitely
using  using tokens and using the
using using tokens and using the
platform in a different way. I think
that's that's super interesting.
yeah.
>> Yeah. Just let me add there's a last
one.
>> Yeah. Yeah. To to answer that last
>> Yeah. Yeah. To to answer that last
question. Yes. One of our also our
current goals is  to bring
current goals is to bring
liquidity from other blockchains
in particular from Ethereum based
blockchains  liquidity and that's
blockchains liquidity and that's
because actually we're not only based on
working on stellar but we're also
working on base
and we see this  potential from
and we see this potential from
bringing more liquidity to stellar
from base  through this infrastructure
from base through this infrastructure
projects and  yes we are taking a
projects and yes we are taking a
look at  near intense.
>> Great. Well, thank you for joining
everyone and thank you for joining too,
Fernando. It was  great to to catch up
Fernando. It was great to to catch up
with you and  I'm sure I'll see you at
with you and I'm sure I'll see you at
events around the world like I have this
the past year. Thank you for the
invitation. It was a pleasure.
>> Yeah. And and if anyone else has any
>> Yeah. And and if anyone else has any
questions, I'm sure you can reach out to
the team on on Discord. I think one of
the things that's very interesting about
this is that brings up some use cases
and some some things that are  that
and some some things that are that
that raises some questions because maybe
we haven't seen that before or maybe
we're not used to thinking about
tokenization in this way or  using the
tokenization in this way or using the
platform. So, a lot of great questions
that really that really  I think you
that really that really I think you
had great answers and it's it's
interesting to to see how you're
building this. So, thank you everyone
and  see you again next week.
and see you again next week.
>> Thank you. Bye. Bye.